The story revolves around Vandiyathevan, a charming, brave and courageous young man who sets out across the Chola land to deliver a message from the Crown Prince, Aditya Karikalan, to Emperor Sundara Chola and Princess Kundavai. The story shuttles between Vandiyathevan's travels in Chola country and the young Prince Arulmozhivarman's (later known as Raja Raja Chola) travels in Sri Lanka. The narrative details attempts by his sister Kundavai to bring back Arulmozhivarman to establish political peace in a land seemingly beset with unrest and civil war plotted by vassals and petty chieftains. The story begins as the emperor Sundara Chola is ill and bedridden. His son Aditya Karikalan is the general of the Northern Command and lives in Kanchi. The younger son Arulmozhivarman is in Sri Lanka on a military campaign. Their sister Kundavai lives in the Chola royal household at Pazhayarai. The story advances when rumours abound that there is a conspiracy against Sundara Chola and his sons.
Vallavarayan Vandiyathevan, Crown Prince Aditha Karikalan's messenger, is sent by him to investigate the conspiracy and deliver the news to Sundara Chola and his sister Kundavai. Vandiyathevan reaches Veeranarayanapuram where he meets a vaishvite spy, Azhwarkaddiyan Nambi. There he sees Periya Pazhuvettarayar, the country's treasurer along with his wife Nandhini in a closed palanquin who are on their way to Kadambur. After seeing the palanquin, Nambi asks if Vandiyathevan can deliver a message to Ilaya Rani ( Nandhini ) if he meets her in Kadambur. Vandiyathevan reaches Kadambur and meets his friend Kandhamaaran ( Kadambur prince ). He is invited to see the devaralan aatam where he meets many other petty chieftains. At the night, he eavesdroops on a secret meeting at the palace. In the meeting, the chieftains take an oath to make Prince Maduranthaka Thevar, Gandaradithya Chola's son as the next king. While he listens to all of these, he finds Nambi too, trying to listen to their plan. The next day, Vandiyathevan leaves for Thanjavur to reveal the conspiracy to Sundara Chola. On the way he finds Nambi and asks his true motive for visiting Kadambur and what relationship he has with Pazhuvoor Ilaya Rani. To this Nambi reveals that Nandhini was his foster sister and disappeared under mysterious circumstances. After they cross the Kollidam river, Vandiyathevan leaves for Tanjai while Nambi gets a chance to eavesdrop on pandiya spies talking about destroying the Chola kingdom. On the way to Tanjai, Vandiyathevan sees Ilaya Rani's palanquin and goes near it vowing to meet Maduranthakan but is disappointed seeing the actual Nandhini in the palanquin. Nandhini gives Pazhuvoor a signet ring to Vandiyathevan and asks him to use that to access the Tanjavur fort. Vandiyathevan reaches Tanjai and meets a flower-selling youth, Sendhan Amudhan who helps him. The next morning, Vandiyathevan enters the fort using the signet ring outsmarting the fort commander, Chinna Pazhuvettarayar. Vandiyathevan meets emperor Sundar Chola and reveals about the conspiracy against him and his sons. Chinna Pazhuvettarayar suspects him and arrests him but Vandiyathevan escapes smartly and climbs a ladder that leads him to Ilaya Rani's latha mandapam. He meets Nandhini and delivers his message from Azhwarkaddiyan and tells her about his venture. The ladder Vandiyathevan climbed to reach latha mandapam was actually meant for Ravidasa, who is referred to as Mandhiravadi. After talking with Nandhini, Vandiyathevan finds an entrance to a secret passage and tries to escape through it. Periya Pazhuvettarayar reaches Tanjai and meets his brother who reveals his suspicion about Nandhini. Vandiyathevan sees Maduranthakan coming through passage with Kandhamaaran and is welcomed by Periya Pazhuvettarayar and Nandhini. Finally, after exploring the passage he finds the exit to it. There Vandiyathevan finds Kandhamaaran stabbed and saves him but Kandhamaaran thinks Vandiyathevan tried to kill him and turns against him. Learning that Vandiyathevan escaped, Chinna Pazhuvettarayar sends his soldiers to capture him. With the help of Sendhan, Vandiyathevan escapes but Sendhan is captured instead of him. Vandiyathevan reaches Pazhayaarai where Ilaya Pirati Kundavai Devi lives. With Nambi's help Vandiyathevan meets Kundavai and delivers Karikalan's message to her. Kundavai asks Vandiyathevan to bring Arulmozhi Varman, aka Ponniyin Selvan, back from Lanka along with a doctor's son, Pinnagapani, to bring medicines for Sundara Chola. Aditha Karikalan, his grandfather, Thirukovalor Malayaman and friend, Parthibendra Pallavan discuss the country's problems and decide that Parthibendra should go to Lanka to bring Arulmozhi. At night, Parthibendra insists Karikalan reveal his past. In his youth, Aditha Karikalan and Nandhini love each other, they were sure that they will get married and live a happy life, but whole royal family was against their love and plot to separate them. So when Karikalan went to war Nandini was expelled from the kingdom by Karikalan's family as she is an orphan so they don't want her to be Aditha Karikalan's wife who is going to be the king, but Karikalan is unaware of his family's plan. He started to search her everywhere when he returned. Aditha Karikalan and Nandini cannot forget each other even when they are miles apart. Later she becomes vengeful and vows to destroy the Chola dynasty after Aditha Karikalan killed Veerapandiyan unaware of that Veerapandiyan is Nandini's father. She marries Periya Pazhuvettarayar who lusts for Nandini in order to seek revenge but she has no relationship with him.
Vandiyathevan reaches Kodikarai and meets Poonguzhali, lighthouse keeper Thygaravidagar's daughter. He tries to seek Poonguzhali's help but she refuses. Pinnagapani starts to dislike Vandiyathevan and tries to get him caught by Chinna Pazhuvettarayar's soldiers. Poonguzhali helps him to escape. Finally, he convinces her and reaches Lanka to meet Ponniyin Selvan. Ilaya Pirati Kundavai Devi reaches Tanjavur and meets her father Sundara Cholar who is ill and is depressed. To seek the reason behind it, Kundavai talks with her father and learns that in his youth, Sundara Cholar went to Lanka and falls in love with a deaf-mute woman named Mandakini. After some days, Chola ships arrived there and took him to Tanjai and he promised her that he will return but fails. He says that he saw her again multiple times and thinks that she vowed to torture his family. He had said his prime minister, Aniruddha Brahmarayar to bring Mandakini back to him but Brahmarayar lies that she died. From then he is disturbed and falls ill. Ilaya Rani Nandhini helps Kandhamaaran heal. Sendhan Amudhan caught by the soldiers is put in jail. Learning that he is Vandiyathevan's friend, Kundavai asks Chinna Pazhuvettarayar to release him. Nandhini who is known for her beauty, uses Kandhamaaran and asks him to invite Karikalan to Kadambur. Kandhamaaran agrees. Periya Pazhuvettarayar asks Nandhini about the signet ring with Vandiyathevan and she acts as if she did that as a part of their plan. In Lanka, Kodambalur Periya vellar Boothi Vikrama Kesari arrests Vandiyathevan but is saved by Nambi. They together go in search of Ponniyin Selvan. They meet Parthibendra along with some soldiers. They realise that the soldiers are Pandiya Aabathudavigal who are vowing to kill Ponniyin Selvan. They find Ponniyin Selvan is an elephant rider for foreigners. Ponniyin Selvan welcomes Vandiyathevan with a fight. They reach Anuradhapuram for a festival. On the way, they see a tall Buddha statue with some clues that invite Ponniyin Selvan to an underground Buddhist monastery where he is offered the Lankan crown but he refuses it. When they return, they are attacked by Aabathudavigal but are saved by Mandakini. They come back to Anuradhapuram and rest.
Ponniyin Selvan reveals that Mandakini was the one who saved him while he was drowning in Ponni river. This is the reason why he attains that name. Ponniyin Selvan also tells that Mandakini had saved him multiple times in Lanka too. While they talk about her, Mandakini comes there and takes them somewhere to show some drawings about her life. Next day, Kodambalur vellar meets Ponniyin Selvan and advices him to stay in Lanka itself. Parthibendra asks him to come to Kanchi. Vandiyathevan tells him to come along with him to Pazhayarai. Kodambalur vellar also reveals that a Chola ship has come to arrest Ponniyin Selvan with Chakravarthi's orders. He tells that he learned it from Poonguzhali. Poonguzhali who has feelings for Ponniyin selvan reveals about what she saw and heard. Even though everyone says Ponniyin Selvan to not go to Tanjavur, he goes with Poonguzhali to the Chola ships only to find that the Chola soldiers were killed by Arabians. Vandiyathevan boards a ship thinking that it is a chola ships but finds Aabathudavigal there. Ponniyin selvan goes to save Vandiyathevan in Parthibendra's ship. Due to the cyclone, Ponniyin Selvan and Vandiyathevan drown in the sea. Poonguzhali saves them.
Periya Pazhuvettarayar learns about Ponniyin Selvan's drowning. He reaches Kodikarai along with Nandhini and lines up his soldiers along the coast to find Ponniyin Selvan if he comes there. Nandhini uses the opportunity and asked Parthibendra to bring Karikalan to Kadambur. Ponniyin Selvan falls ill with a poisonous fever. They consider going to Kodikarai but Pazhuvettarayar's soldiers guard the coast. Poonguzhali leaves them in her own shelter in the forest and goes to investigate learning about Aabathudavigal's relationship with her brother's wife, Rakkamma. She finds Sendhan Amudhan who follows her. Mandhiravadi Ravidasa follows her to find Ponniyin Selvan but fails, getting caught inside a mud pond. He is saved but Vandiyathevan and Poonguzhali fool Ravidasa and escape. Poonguzhali learns that Sendhan bought news from Kundavai who wants Ponniyin Selvan to arrive at Nagapattinam. They take him there after Vandiyathevan leaves for Pazhayarai. On the way, he stops at an iron smelter to give his horse some iron protection for its legs. There he finds a sword with the fish emblem of the Pandiya. After he sleeps there for so awhile, he learns that the Pazhuvettarayar family crossed him by telling him about Ponniyin Selvan's drowning and are on their way to Tanjavur. On the way to Pazhayarai, he finds Devaralan who takes him to Nandhini. He reaches Pazhayarai. To enter the fort he claims that he is an astrologer to Maduranthakan and fools him. Maduranthakan is stopped by his mother who tells him to leave all his will to become the Chola emperor but he does not pay heed to her request. Vandiyathevan meets Kundavai and reveals everything to her. Brahmarayar and Kundavai send Vandiyathevan to warn Karikalan about Nandhini and protect him. Vanathi who is worried about Ponniyin Selvan, learns about his presence in Nagapattinam and ventures there. On the way, she is interrupted by Shaivites who force her to reveal Ponniyin Selvan's whereabouts. She refuses and they attack her. She falls unconscious and gets up to find herself in Kundavai's lap. Kundavai tells her that all of it was a dream but it was just a plan made by her to test Vanathi. When Vanathi is attacked even Vandiyathevan sees it. He goes to save her but on the way meets Maduranthakan. He reaches a pallipadai where Aabathudavigal were gathered to crown a young boy as a Pandiya prince. Vandiyathevan is found but Nandhini stops them from killing him. Kundavai and Vanathi reach Aanaimangalam and meet Ponniyin Selvan and discuss their next step.
Paying heed to Nandhini's request, Karikalan goes to Kadambur. Vandiyathevan and Nambi go to Kadambur where they find a secret passage to enter the palace. Vandiyathevan enters it to go into vettai mandapam. There he sees some aabathudavigal. He opens another exit of the passage that leads to Nandhini's room where he sees Kadhamaaran's sister Manimegalai, who hearing about Vandiyathevan, has fallen in love with him. He then escapes by using Manimegalai. He meets Karikalan and warns him about Nandhini but Karikalan doesn't listen. Aditha Karikalan cannot forget Nandini and is unable to hate her even though he knows her evil plans against him and the Chola dynasty, revealing his pure love for Nandini. Pazhuvettarayar and Nandhini come to Kadambur. Karikalan also reaches Kadambur and is welcomed by the Sambuvarayar family. Periya Pazhuvettarayar talks with Karikalan about the next emperor. Karikalan agrees to crown Maduranthaka as the king but puts in a condition stating that he should be given permission to seize lands towards the north and be the emperor for the places he annexed. The chieftains agree to this and send Pazhuvettatayar to bring Maduranthaka from Tanjavur. Pazhuvettarayar leaves Nandhini in Kadambur and ventures to Tanjavur. In Kodikarai, Poonguzhali sends Sendhan back to Tanjavur and tries to take her aunt Mandakini to Nagapattinam to meet Ponniyin Selvan. They are interrupted by men who take Mandakini to Tanjavur. Poonguzhali and Sendhan reunite again and follow Mandakini. When they are almost near Tanjai, heavy rain causes flooding in the Chola country. Intending to save Mandakini, Poonguzhali exchanges herself with her aunt and sits in the palanquin and goes to Tanjai Fort. Sendhan Amudhan takes his aunt to his home. Kundavai comes to Brahmarayar's home to talk about her father's bad condition and the damage to Chola country because of the flood. Actually, Brahmarayar's men were those who kidnapped Mandakini. After learning about Poonguzhali's exchange, they send her to bring Mandakini but she fails as Mandakini enters a secret tunnel through which some aabathudavigal have entered that leads to Sundara Chola's room. Mandakini that night exits the tunnel and meets Sundara Chola. Sundara Chola is shocked by her arrival and gets angry. The next morning, Mandakini enters the tunnel again, spying on the aabathudavigal. In Kadambur, Nandhini gains Manimegalai's friendship and uses her for her plan. They leave for veeranarayana pond for a picnic where they meet Vandiyathevan and Karikalan who come to the forest for hunting, where Nandini had a conversation with Karikalan.
On the way to Tanjai, Pazhuvettarayar is caught in the storm and drowns in Kollidam. After suffering a lot he reaches a Durga temple near the river. There he gets a chance to follow Pandiya aabathudavigal who talks about murdering Sundar Chola and his sons tomorrow. Listening to this, Pazhuvettarayar attacks them but they escape. During their talk, they also reveal about Nandhini's motive. Pazhuvettarayar goes to Kudanthai where he meets Kundavai and Vanathi, alerts them about the conspiracy and returns to Kadambur. On the same night, Nagapattinam Choodamani Viharam gets drowned while Ponniyin Selvan saves the head Buddhist monk and reaches Aanaimangalam palace. There he is forced to reveal himself to the people and plans to leave for Tanjai. The aabathudavigal plan to kill Ponniyin Selvan using his elephant rider but fails miserably as Ponniyin Selvan knows how to control elephants. While going to Tanjai, Vanathi gets caught in a flood. Ponniyin Selvan reaches there on time and saves her. Along with Vanathi, Ponniyin Selvan reaches Tanjavur, enters the fort as an elephant rider and meets his father Sundara Chola. There the aabathudavigal try to kill Sundara Chola but is stopped by Mandakini who sacrifices her life for him revealing her love for him and his family. In Kadambur, Nandhini plans to kill Karikalan and arranges for it. Vandiyathevan and pandyas were also hiding in Nandhini's room. Karikalan comes to Nandini's room even after he knows her plan to kill him. When Nandini sees Karikalan she hesitates. She hates Aditha Karikalan for changing her fate but she also loves him for accepting her for herself. Vandiyathevan became unconscious by Pandyas. Aditha Karikalan and Nandini reveal their love for each other and regret their fate. Suddenly lights go off and when the lights turn on again Aditha Karikalan is found dead in the room. The room catches fire. Vandiyathevan regains consciousness, finds Aditha Karikalan, and brings his body out of the room. Everyone suspects Vandiyathevan because there was no one in the place except him so they tie him up. They take them to Tanjavur, read Karikalan the last rites and discuss the next step. Nambi and Poonguzhali save Pazhuvettarayar and reveal the true motive of Nandini. Periya Pazhuvettarayar realises his mistake and feels guilty for betraying the Chola kingdom in his lust for Nandini. Nandhini escapes on a horse. Vandiyathevan is put in jail where he meets Paithiyakaran, aka Karuthiruman, who reveals he knows a great secret of the Chola dynasty. They work together and escape the jail and with the help of Nambi reach Sendhan's house. There Madurantaka and his mother are found. Karuthiruman escapes with Maduranthaka. Maduranthaka badly wants to become the next king, but his mother reveals that he is not her son but the son of an orphan woman, Mandakini. She exchanged her child, since her child was lifeless. She gives her child to Vaani Amai ( mandakini's deaf sister) who is alerted by Karuthiruman that the child is alive. The child now seems to be Sendhan Amudhan. Upon learning it Madurantaka thinks that he is the Pandiya heir and goes with Karuthiruman. Pinnagapani tries to kill Sendhan but fails. He stabs Vandiyathevan but then thinks it was Adurantaka. Then he follows Karuthiruman along with Kandhamaaran who attack Maduranthaka thinking he is Vandiyathevan. Pinnagapani dies there. Vandiyathevan is saved by Kundavai and Poonguzhali. Since Madurantakan goes missing, Nambi dresses up Sendhan Amudhan as Madurantaka and brings him inside the fort. Manimegalai comes to Tanjai and meets Kundavai and says that she was the one who killed Karikalan just to save Vandiyathevan. She tries to drown in the river where Vandiyathevan saves her. He goes to Sundara Chola's court. Pazhuvettarayar reveals that he was the one who killed Aditha Karikalan releasing Vandiyathevan and killing himself. Before dying he tells Nambi that he did not kill Aditha Karikalan, when he went to the palace Karikalan is already found dead. He accepts the blame because he knows that Vandiyadevan and Kundavai love each other and doesn't want to separate them and also feels guilty for betraying Chola kingdom. Arulmozhi reveals that he will become the next Chakravarthi. Sendhan marries Poonguzhali. Vandiyathevan and Ponniyin Selvan dress as China traders and bring silk clothes for Kundavai and Vanathi. Sembiyan Maadevi asks Ponniyin Selvan to marry Vanathi but he says that she has taken an oath to not become the chakravarthini. During Ponnoyin Selvan's coronation, he makes Chinna Pazhuvettarayar move away from there and crowns Sendhan Amudhan the real madurantakan. Later Arulmozhi Varman meets Nandini who is hiding in a village where she reveals to Arulmozhi about her birth secret and truth behind Karikalan's death. Chinna Pazhuverttarayar realises that his daughter is married to Pandiya's heir and she has gone there. The old madurantaka fights with Chinna Pazhuvettarayar pushing him. Nambi saves him. After Aditha Karikalan's death Nandini loses her will to live as she loves him truly and he is the only man who loved her truly and accepted her even though the whole dynasty was against them, while others only lust after Nandini for her beauty. In her sorrow, she drowns herself in the Ponni River, revealing her pure love for Aditha Karikalan. Aditha Karikalan and Nandini's love story has a tragic end, even though they find true love, they cannot be together. They went from being in love to becoming enemies, but never lost the love they had for each other and died because of it as well.
Vandiyathevan meets Kundavai who both reveal their feelings about each other. Meanwhile, he learns that Ponniyin Selvan married Vanathi. Vandiyathevan receives a message from Kandhamaaran asking him to come and meet Manimegalai. Vandiyathevan goes to meet Manimegalai, who loved him, and dies in his hands.
